# Chapter 3, Semiconductor
- Basis for understanding the physical operation of diodes and transistors.
- *pn* junction → bipolar junction transistor (BJT, Chapter 6) → field-effect transistors (FETs, Chapter 5)

## 3.1 Intrinsic Semiconductors
As the name suggests, it doesn't have any impurity.
### Two types of Intrinsic Semiconductors
- **Single-element semiconductors**
  - group IV in the periodic table (germanium and silicon)
  - Germanium: used in the fabrication of early(~1950s) transistors.
  - Silicon: universally used today.
- **Compound semiconductors**
  - formed by combining elements from groups III and V or groups II and VI (gallium-arsenide).
  - useful in applications that involve light → light-emitting diodes.

### Within the Crystal
A silicon atom has 4 valence electrons, it requires another 4 to complete its outer most shell. Each pair of shared electrons forms a covalent bond.

### Characteristics
- at 0K (absolute zero)
  - **insulator**
  - all the covalent bonds are intact, no electrons are available to conduct electric current. (no free electrons zooming, no current generated)
- at 300K (room temperature)
  - **conductor**
  - **thermal generation**:
    1. thermal energy breaking covalent bonds
    2. electron freed
    3. free electron go zoooooom.
  - **free electron**:
    - a negative charged carrier
    - Available to conduct electric current IF an electric field is applied to the crystal.
  - **hole**:
    - a positive charged carrier
    - The electron leaves its parent atom → left behind a net positive charge
  - Increase in the numbers of free electrons and holes results in a increase in the conductivity.
  
### Thermal Generation
- Generates EQUAL numbers of free electrons and holes.
  - and hence in equal concentrations
- **Recombination**:
  - free electrons filling holes
  - → disappearance of free electrons and holes
  - its rate is proportional to the number of free electrons and holes.
  - recombination rate = thermal generation rate
- **Concentrations**:
  -  concentration of free electrons: *n*
  -  concentration of holes: *p*

$$n=p=n_i \\ pn=n_i^2$$

- $n_i$ : number of free electrons and holes in a unit volume ($cm^3$)

$$n_i=BT^{3/2}e^{-E_g/2kT}$$

(for silicon)
- $B =7.3\times10^{15}cm^{-3}K^{-3/2}$ : a material-dependent parameter
- $T$ : the temperature in K. 1 celsius=272.15K
- $E_g=1.12\space eV$ : bandgap energy, material parameter. Minimum energy required to break a covalent bond.
- $k$ : Boltzmann's constant ($8.62\times10^{-5}\space eV/K$)

**$n_i\simeq1.5\times10^{10}/cm^3$ for silicon at room temperature**

> 1 kelvin = -272.15 celsius
> 1 celsius = 272.15 kelvin

> I put intrinsic semiconductor's characteristics in thermal generation as a reminder not to confuse thermal generation with anything.
---
## 3.2 Doped Semiconductors

### Cons of Intrinsic semiconductor
- *p* and *n* generated by thermal generation are too small to conduct an appreciable current at 300K (room temperature)
- The carrier concentrations are strong functions of temperature
  - not desirable in electronic devices

### Doping
- Introducing impurity atoms into the silicon crystal
  - increase the number of free electrons or holes
  - not alter(little to no change) the crystal properties of silicon
  - called **doped silicon**

- Increase the concentration of... 
  - free electrons: **n type**
    - doped with atoms with valence of 5
  - holes: **p type**
    - doped with atoms with valence of 3

### n type
- dopant atom:
  - phosphorus (P)
  - which is a pentavalent atom
- Process:
  1. 4 forms covalent bonds and the 5th electron becomes a free electron
  2. no hole is generated.
  3. because the 5th electron wanders freely, it left behind a **net positive charge** associated with the phosphorus atom, which is called a **bound charge** and it doesn't move through the crystal.
- Each phosphorus atom "donates" an electron
  - the phosphorus impurity is called a **donor**

$$n_n\simeq N_D \\ p_nn_n=n_i^2 \space,\space N_D\gg n_i \\ p_n\simeq\frac{n_i^2}{N_D}$$

- $n_n$ : the concentration of free electrons in the n-type silicon
  - **majority** charge carrier
- $p_n$ : the concentration of holes in the n-type silicon
  - **minority** charge carrier
  - have the same dependence on temperature as $n_i^2$
- $N_D$ : the concentration of donor atoms

### p type
- dopant atom:
  - boron (B)
  - which is a trivalent atom
- Process:
  1. 3 forms covalent bonds (from outer shell), accepts 1 from the neighboring atom, forming a hole in the neighboring atom.
  2. no free electron is generated
  3. because the impurity atom accepts an electron, it has a **net negative charge** at the boron atom(bound charge).
- Each born atom "accepts" an electron
  - the boron atom is called an **acceptor**

$$p_p\simeq N_A \\ p_pn_p=n_i^2\space,\space N_A\gg n_i \\ n_p\simeq\frac{n_i^2}{N_A}$$

- $n_p$ : the concentration of free electrons in p-type silicon
  - **minority** charge carriers
- $p_p$ : the concentration of holes in the p-type silicon
  - **majority** charge carriers
- $N_A$ : the concentration of acceptor atoms

### Characteristics of doped silicons
- electrically neutral
  - the charge of the majority free carriers is neutralized by the bound charges associated with teh impurity atoms.

---
## 3.3 Current Flow in Semiconductors
Two distinctly different mechanisms for the movements of charge carriers, drift and diffusion.
### 3.3.1 Drift Current
`Electric field`E is established in a semiconductor crystal, holes are accelerated in the direction of *E*.

#### Velocity
$$v_{p-drift}=\mu_pE \\ v_{n-drift}=-\mu_nE$$

- **$\mu_p$** : a constant, **hole mobility**
  - represents the ease by which the holes move through the silicon crystal in response to the electrical field *E*.
  - for intrinsic silicon: $\mu_p=480\space cm^2/V\cdot s$
- $\mu_n$ : a constant, **electron mobility**
  - for intrinsic silicon: $\mu_n=1350\space cm^2/V\cdot s$
- $2.5\mu_p\simeq\mu_n$
  - electrons move with greater ease than holes.

#### Current
let *p* = *n* (an intrinsic silicon bar)

$$I_{S,p}=Aqpv_{p-drift} \\ =Aqp\mu_pE$$

$$I_{S,n}=-Aqv_{n-drift} \\ =Aqn\mu_nE$$

- $A$ : the cross-sectional area of the silicon bar
- $q=1.6\times10^{-19}$ : the magnitude of electron charge
- by convention, the electrons drifting direction is opposite to that of current. (and the electron drifting velocity is already negative)

 
#### Current Density
We're usually interested in the current density, which is current per unit cross-sectional area.

$$J_{S,p}=\frac{I_{S,p}}{A}=qp\mu_pE$$

$$J_{S,n}=\frac{I_{S,n}}{A}=qn\mu_nE$$

total drift density:

$$J_S=J_{S,p}+J_{S,n}=q(p\mu_p+n\mu_n)E$$

can express this alternatively, where resistivity *ρ*
$$J=E/\rho\space,\space\rho=\frac{E}{J} \\ \rho=\frac{1}{q(p\mu_p+n\mu_n)}$$

and the resistance R is
$$R=\frac{\rho L}{A}$$

- $\rho$ : resistivity $(\frac{V/cm}{A/cm^2}=\Omega\cdot cm)$
- $J_S$ : current density of the drift current (A/cm²)

### 3.3.2 Diffusion Current
`Concentration difference`
1. density of charge carriers not uniform
2. carrier diffusion, carriers will diffuse from high to low concentration region. 
3. net flow of charge
4. diffusion current.

#### Density, Concentration Profile
The hole injection → hole concentration profile. 

The magnitude of the current at any point is proportional to the **slope of the concentration profile** aka **concentration gradient** = $\frac{dp(x)}{dx}$

$$J_{D,p}=-qD_p\frac{dp(x)}{dx}$$

$$J_{D,n}=qD_n\frac{dn(x)}{dx}$$

- $J_{D,p}$ : hole-current density (A/cm²)
- $J_{D,n}$ : electron-current density (A/cm²)
- $q$ : magnitude of electron charge
- **$D_p$** : **diffusion constant**, diffusivity of holes
  - typical value in intrinsic silicon: 12 cm²/s
- $D_n$ : diffusion constant, diffusivity of electrons
  - typical value in intrinsic silicon: 35 cm²/s
- $p(x)$ : the hole concentration at point x
- $n(x)$ : the electron concentration at point x

### 3.3.3 Relationship between D and μ

$$\frac{D_n}{\mu_n}=\frac{D_p}{\mu_p}=V_{T}$$

- $V_T$ : thermal voltage (kT/q), 25.9mV at 300K
- the relationship is also called Einstein relationship

## 3.4 The pn Junction

### Operation with Open-Circuit Terminals

#### Diffusion Current
- $I_D$ : p → n
  - majority-carriers diffusion, p(holes) ⇄ n(free electrons)

#### Depletion Region 
(aka. carrier depletion region, space-charge region)

- the diffused holes(from p side) **uncover**(neutralize the free electrons, n-region majority carrier) the **bound charges**(net positive charge associated with the atom) at the n region → creates a positive depletion region at the n side (*depleted of free electrons*)
- the diffused electrons(from n side) uncover the bound charges (net negative charge) at the p region → negative depletion region at p side.

#### Drift Current
- $I_S$ : p ← n
  - minority-carriers drift, p(free electrons) ⇄ n (holes)

#### Equilibrium

$$I_D=I_S$$

#### Junction Built-in Voltage
(aka barrier voltage)

$$V_0=V_T\space ln(\frac{N_AN_D}{n_i^2})$$

#### Width and Charge Stored in the Depletion Region

## 3.5 The pn Junction with an Applied Voltage

### 3.5.1 Qualitative Description of Junction Operation

### 3.5.2 The Current-Voltage Relationship of the Junction

### 3.5.3 Reverse Breakdown

## 3.6 Capacitive Effects in the pn Junction

### 3.6.1 Depletion or Junction Capacitance

### 3.6.2 Diffusion Capacitance
